Modernize Helm 4 HIP (#346)
helm/community: hips/hip-0012.md

---
hip: "0012"
title: "Helm 4 Development Process"
authors: [ "Matt Butcher <matt.butcher@fermyon.com>", "George Jenkins <gvjenkins@gmail.com>", "Matt Farina <matt.farina@suse.com>" ]
created: "2021-04-02"
type: "process"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

Helm 4 is planned as the next major version release of Helm.

> With KubeCon/CloudNativeCon North America 2024 marking the fifth anniversary of the successful Helm 3 release, the development of Helm 4 is strongly desired in order to continue evolving Helm and its ecosystem.

Author: hmm, one goal was to point out that it has been a long time since Helm 3's release. I guess I can just refer to KubeCon 2019 as the release of Helm 3, and point out that has been at least 5 years since

And at worst, could splinter the Helm ecosystem.

The project also aims to timebox the Helm 4 release process.
Given the limited community resources available to enact changes, it is considered more important to produce a Helm 4 release that can deliver significant benefits in a moderate timeframe than a prolonged process that takes too long to provide meaningful results.

## Rationale

During the Helm 3 development process, Helm core maintainers received criticism that the process was not transparent enough.
This proposal aims to outline a formal process for a successful Helm 4 release to address those criticisms.

Further criticism included a lack of clarity regarding who was in charge and how decisions were being made, as well as uncertainty about the criteria used for determining when Helm 3 was complete.

This document is intended to address these criticisms by presenting a clear plan for the timely delivery of a valuable Helm 4 release to the community.
It describes the process in detail, providing both a roadmap for us to follow and a point of reference for community members to use when contributing changes.

The process is based on the following ideas:

> - Requiring changes to be documented, either as “Helm 4 proposals” or standard HIPs, allows both Helm community members and maintainers to review them.

Author: heh, I like it. A more specific term/phrase other than the generic and little wordy "Helm 4 proposal" is better. Will add.

This oversight ensures that changes are in line with this HIP, regarding their functional and architectural implementation.
Additionally, documented changes enable contributors to independently implement agreed-upon proposals in coordination with the release engineer.
- Requiring a timeboxed development effort intends to promote focus on the most valuable changes that the community and maintainers can deliver within a reasonable timeframe.
It also aims to prevent an "open-ended" development cycle that might drag on or fizzle out.
Ideally, the majority of changes will be proposed and agreed upon during the planning phase of the development cycle.
However, amendments to the initial scope are permitted as long as they can fit within the agreed-upon timeframe.
Explicitly allowing for scope amendments ensures that any changes are well thought out.

> For changes that don't make it into Helm 4, there will be a Helm 5 release of course!

Author: I think we can/should say both. I agree, it is important to point out that Helm 4 development continues with minor releases (which can include features). Will include that point. Thanks!

But mentioning Helm 5 is to point out that the Helm 4 development is a timebox shouldn't creep to include features that can't make it in time . And that Helm 5 exists for those features.

## Specification

### The process / timelines

Helm 4 development will consist of three main phases:
1. Planning
1. Feature development
1. Release preparation

The timeline will be approximately:

1. Marking this HIP as "accepted"
1. Naming of a Release Engineer: Nov. 2024
1. Kick-off meeting: KubeCon/CloudNativeCon North America 2024 (Salt Lake City)
1. Earliest that engineering can begin: Nov. 2024

> 1. Expected release of Helm v4.0.0 will be planned for the week before KubeCon/CloudNativeCon North America 2025 (expected November 2025)

Author: I think it is okay to tie to the date. Since the first Item is to "mark this HIP as accepted". Which should only be done if the dates at that point are in good order.

Agree, we can use "by" to indicate an earlier release can happen. Will adjust

Helm 3 will reach end of life six months after Helm 4 release (July. 2026 estimated)

### Change suitability

The Helm ecosystem is large, encompassing not just the Helm CLI but also the SDK, Charts, and Chart repositories, plugins, and so on.
Helm also has several [roles or personas](https://github.com/helm/community/blob/main/user-profiles.md) for different user categories, from "Application Operators" to "Helm Developers."
The Helm project must be careful in how it delivers changes without causing significant adverse impact to Helm's users or the overall Helm ecosystem.

Therefore, while Helm 4 does not need to be semantically backwards compatible with Helm 3, it must not cause significant breakage for users who adopt Helm 4.
Clear migration options and paths should be documented and presented for Helm 3 users to update to Helm 4.

### Change proposals

To ensure that Helm 4 changes align with this HIP, Helm core maintainers will review proposals.
These proposals can take the form of lighter-weight Helm 4-specific proposals or standard HIPs suitable for Helm 4 implementation.

> Once a Helm 4 proposal is deemed suitable, it will be marked as implementable in the `hips/helm-v4` directory under `hips/helm`.

Author: ack

Standard Helm HIPs that are marked suitable for Helm 4 will also be accepted.

#### Helm 4 proposals
A "Helm 4 proposal" is a lighter-weight alternative process to a standard Helm HIP.
Designed to minimize the friction required for implementing small, functional changes in Helm 4 that do not warrant a full HIP process.
And specifically intended to avoid development of features from e.g. Github issues.
A "Helm 4 proposal" will follow the same format as a HIP, but the author can choose to skip sections they do not feel applicable.
Helm maintainers may choose to promote a "Helm 4 proposal" to be a standard HIP should they feel the change is significant enough.

### Compatibility

Even though Helm 4 is a major version release not bound by [HIP-0004](./hip-0004.md) compatibility guarantees, it must remain largely feature/functionality compatible with Helm 3.
Due to Helm's maturity and the extensive ecosystem built around its CLI, charts, SDK, and so on.

> Where non-compatible changes are introduced, they should have migration documentation for equivalent functionality.

Author: I thought about this a little. I'm not against adding something on testing. But I don't think it fits into the compatibility section.

And overall, I'm not sure if it is really necessary. As a general principal, Helm requires "high quality" contributions. And that implies appropriate (unit) test coverage. So having test coverage for new feature release is already implied. All that said, I can add something if we really want to emphasize the point (as above, I'm not against)

> Where non-compatible changes are introduced, they should have migration documentation for equivalent functionality.

Reviewer: I'm good with that. Let's not over engineer the approach

Functionality removal should prefer deprecation over immediate removal.
Behavioral changes that negatively impact a significant number of users without reasonable migration options cannot be allowed.

Specific requirements for compatibility include the below:

#### Compatibility with existing charts and releases

While the tooling can evolve, Helm must maintain compatibility with existing charts and releases.
A Helm 4 that cannot operate on Helm 3 charts (and vice versa) effectively becomes a different tool, which likely would diverge the Helm ecosystem.

Specifically, charts deployable with Helm 3 should be deployable by Helm 4.

> Similarly, any release manageable by Helm 3 must be upgradable by Helm 4.

Author: Yes, I think we should of course. I will take on ensuring those get added. I don't think we need to include that detail in the HIP (which is setting the requirements)

---
hip: "0012"
title: "Helm 4 Development Process"
authors: [ "Matt Butcher <matt.butcher@fermyon.com>", "George Jenkins <gvjenkins@gmail.com>", "Matt Farina <matt.farina@suse.com>" ]
created: "2021-04-02"
type: "process"

> status: "draft"

Reviewer 2: The status needs to be updated to "accepted"

Helm 3 will reach end of life 6-8 months after Helm 4 release (July 2026 estimated)

### Change suitability

The Helm ecosystem is large, including not just the Helm CLI but also the SDK, Charts, and Chart repositories, plugins.
Helm also has several [roles or personas](https://github.com/helm/community/blob/main/user-profiles.md) for different user categories, from "Application Operators" to "Helm Developers."
The Helm project must be careful in how it delivers changes without causing significant adverse impact to Helm's users or the overall Helm ecosystem.

Therefore, while Helm 4 does not need to be semantically backwards compatible with Helm 3, it must not cause significant breakage for users who adopt Helm 4.
Clear migration options and paths should be documented and presented for Helm 3 users to update to Helm 4.

### Change proposals

To ensure that Helm 4 changes align with this HIP, Helm core maintainers will review proposals.
These proposals can take the form of lighter-weight Helm 4-specific proposals "H4HIP"s, or standard HIPs suitable for Helm 4 implementation.

> Once a H4HIP is deemed suitable, it will be marked as implementable in the `hips/helm-v4` directory.

Reviewer 2: Why the need for the `hips/helm-v4` directory? The current `archives` directory is due to design docs that predate HIPS. Can we just put them all in the `hips` directory?

Author: The thought was, that as these are "reduced" HIPs specific to Helm 4. We would want to keep them separate from more general purpose (for lack of a better phrase) HIPs

Reviewer 2: Why keep them separate? Also, the directory makes them seem as though all v4 HIPS should go there. Won't people find the UX weird where full HIPS for v4 are in the `hips` directory?

If I look at the `MUST` call outs in the requirements for a HIP there is only one related to this and that's backwards compat. Since this is a major version jump, little to nothing needs to go there.

What am I missing?

Author: decision was made to move "Helm 4 HIPs" to main HIP directory. Changes remaining for "Helm 4 HIPs" are basically to make them as free-form (reduced) as possible compared to normal.

The development of Helm for is strongly desired in order to continue to evolve Helm and its ecosystem.

This HIP documents the requirements and process for building Helm 4.
Describing the scope of Helm 4 changes.
With particular concern to maintaining continuality in the Helm ecosystem.

This HIP also aims for an open and productive process that enables Helm 4 to build on the success of Helm 3 and to continues to evolve Helm for the success of the Helm communitity.

<!--

Changes are to be managed by accompanying (lighter-weight) "Helm 4 proposal", or standard Helm HIP.

To be approved by Helm maintainers.
Once approved, enabling the related changes to be approved/merged by a release engineer.
In order to ease the transtions for users, behavioural changes will need to be accompained by release notes and migration guides, etc.

Preventing a protacted process that prevents the release of Helm 4 in a timely fashion (there will be a Helm 5 of course!)

The release engineer will determine when Helm 4 is ready to ship. And once shipped, the defined deprecation phase for Helm 3 will begin.
-->

## Motivation

Helm 3 has been greatly sucessful.

> And Helm has built a significant ecosystem of the Helm tooling (CLI), charts, chart repositories and repos, the SDK, plugins, etc.

Reviewer 2: This sentence doesn't read quite right. Maybe something like....

> And Helm has built a significant ecosystem around the Helm client (CLI), charts, chart repositories, SDK, plugins, etc.

The Helm project needs to continue to evolve.
Kubernetes itself has continued to grow and change.

> And Helm needs to continue to evolve as well to continue to provide value to the Helm community.

Reviewer 2: Evolve feels like an ill defined word, here. What about something like...

> As Kubernetes continues to grow and change, Helm needs to adapt to those changes while continuing to grow new features and functionality to support its mission around package management for Kubernetes.

However, Helm has also accumulated debt.

> And Helm 3 today has the significant issue that many (good) changes are overly difficult to implement due to compatibility concerns: either breakage of behavioural functionality or API incompatibility.

Reviewer 2: This might be a good place to mention SemVer and how breaking and behavioral changes cannot happen without a major version change.

But changes to this initial scope can be ammended during the course of the development lifecycle.
So long as they can fit within the agreed upon timeframe.
Making amending the scope an exlicit requirement seeks to ensure that any changes are well thought out.
For further changes that don't make it into Helm 4, there will be a Helm 5 of course!

## Specification

### Prerequisites
Before Helm can start the development of Helm v4 there are some things the Helm organization needs to have in order.
These include:

- Active maintainers who will take the time to review changes.
Helm has been in an unoffical "maintenance mode" for some time where changes have slowed down and the project needs the people capable of driving a Helm 4.
- Direction on what is in and out of scope for Helm 4.
It’s important to be able to know what to say “yes” to and what to say “no” to with reasons for both.
- A timeline for the development of Helm 4.
A timeline sets expectations for the time of development.
If the time for development is open-ended then development could end up in a perl 6 development cycle and just take forever.
At some point development needs to stop.

> This HIP aims to define sucess criteria for these.

Reviewer 2: Should we take out this section? I ask for a few reasons...

* "maintenance mode" can send a bit of the wrong impression because Helm has been active, even if the activity has been lower. This includes new features. I asked AI what "maintenance mode" means and this is what I got...
> "Maintenance mode" in reference to an open source project typically means that the project is no longer actively developed with new features or major changes. Instead, the focus is on maintaining the existing codebase.
* We don't have a full list of what's in scope so this pre-requisite isn't achieved and won't likely ever be.

Author: agree, removed (I copied from the doc "Prerequisites" section; but agree doesn't really belong in the HIP in hindsight)

### The process / timelines

Helm 4 development will consist of three main phases:
1. Planning
1. Feature development
1. Release preparation

The timeline will be approximately:

1. Marking this HIP as non-draft
1. Naming of a Release Engineer: Nov. 2024
1. Kick-off meeting: KubeCon/CloudNativeCon North America 2024 (Salt Lake City)
1. Earliest that engineering can begin: Nov. 2024
1. Expected release of Helm v4.0.0 will be planned for the week before KubeCon/CloudNativeCon North America 2025 (expected November 2025)

> Prior to the stable release there will be 4-6 weeks of release candidates for the public to test. The time period will be determined by the testing and state of trust in the code leading up to the release candidate window.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this should be synced differently with the release preparation section. That covers betas, RCs, etc. Thoughts?

Author: (I thought I responded here previously) I've moved this to the release preparation section

For forther changes that don't make it into Helm 4, there will be a Helm 5 of course!

## Specification

There will be an active Helm 4 planning then development phases, followed by an alpha period, a beta period, and a release candidate period.

Attempt to consider different parts of the Helm ecosystem seperately. As different parts of the ecosystem has focus from different users. These largely are:
- Charts, including chart authors and consumers (users)
- Helm cli users
- SDK users

- every non-compatible change must have a migration docs
- behavioural changes that negatively affect a significant number of users (without a reasonable migration) can't be allowed
- charts that can be deployed with Helm 3 must be deployable by Helm 4. And similarly, any release created by Helm 3 much be managable by Helm 4 and vice versa.

### Change suitability

The Helm ecosystem is large and encompasses the Helm CLI as well as the SDK and Charts. The Helm project must be judicious in how it delivers changes without significant adverse impact to the ecosystem.

> So while Helm 4 need not be semantically backwards compatible with Helm 3, it must not cause significant breakage through the

Reviewer 3: The statement seems truncated, I guess the intent was to express something like this?

```suggestion
So, while Helm 4 doesn't need not be semantically backwards compatible with Helm 3, it must not cause significant breakage for users choosing to adopt Helm 4.
```

Author: thanks!

It describes the process in detail, providing both a roadmap for us to follow and a point of reference for community members to use when contributing changes.

The process is based on the following ideas:
- Requiring changes to be documented, either as reduced "Helm 4 proposals" (H4HIP) or standard HIPs.

> Allowing both Helm community members and maintainers to review them.

Author: This is just whitespace (I've put every sentence on a newline in this file, as markdown formats paragraphs regardless. And it makes it easier to modify for me)

- Determine the timelines for development
- Make the determination of when the project has indeed reached a milestone
- Name and oversee releases
- After the release, the release engineer will determine what the "intent" of a Helm behavior was (which informs determining whether an incoming breaking change is a feature or a bug fix)

#### Determining Who Will Be Release Engineer

To become the release engineer for the Helm project, an individual must be a core maintainer on <https://github.com/helm/helm> project.

> The engineer should not be at risk of losing their core maintainer status due to inactivity.

Author: This is the original verbiage. I think it means we can't choose a release engineer who isn't an active core maintainer.

It can change to just saw that: release engineer must be an active maintainer

#### Planning

This phase begins when the release engineer is appointed. The release engineer shall schedule a kick-off meeting, inviting all Helm maintainers from any Helm org project to attend.
The release engineer may also decide who else to include and whether the meeting will be public.
During the kick-off meeting, participants are encouraged to propose feature ideas and changes, with preference given to those already documented as HIPs.

This process continues until the release engineer deems it sufficient, but for a minimum of three months, to allow ample community input.

All proposed features and breaking changes must be described in a standard HIP or Helm 4 proposal.
This approach offers several advantages:
- All changes are documented
- Changes undergo scrutiny before PR creation
- A clear record of alternative considerations exists

HIPs or proposals are not required for "bug fixes" or cleanup as determined by core maintainers.

The outcome of the planning cycle is a well-documented list of approved HIPs detailing Helm 4's features, which must be completed before development commences.
This list will serve as the foundation for working on Helm 4.

> Cleanup and non-functional changes may proceed while in the planning phase.

Reviewer 2: If the planning phase is 3 months we will only end up with 4-5 months to code any changes. This is not a large enough window for development. I would like to suggest some revisions.

* Not all planning needs to be done up front. We have an initial planning phase but additions can come in later.
* Once something is approved, the work can begin on it. We do not need to wait.
* The planning phase ends January 6, 2025. This date is specific because it's when the RC for the next Helm minor release goes out. It will give us around 2 months for initial planning.

Thoughts?

Author: Reduced to two months and relaxed verbiage around changes being allowed before planning completes. But also included the rational for planning: that we do want to try and build the list of main changes prior to focusing on implementation

#### Feature Development

> During this phase, agreed-upon features and changes from the planning stage will be implemented in a development branch of Helm.

Author: Removed this, as we just discussed that we would use the `main` branch (And I happened to notice this in the HIP while making the other changes). Removed, because I think details such as development branches can be decided outside of the HIP.

During the "Feature Development" cycle of Helm 4, Helm 3 will continue to receive security, bug, and minor feature patches.

During the Alpha, Beta, and RC phases of Helm 4, Helm 3 will not receive any feature patches. This is to prevent Helm 3 from introducing features that should be in Helm 4, but during a window when Helm 4's features are frozen.

Helm 3 will receive 6-8 months of bug fixes and one year of security fixes from the day that Helm 4 is released.

## Backwards compatibility

Nothing in this document is contrary to our existing process for decision making.
Specifically [HIP-0004](./hip-0004.md) largely applies to minor/patch releases only.
And not a major version release.
Note that this does not change the PR review process or the HIP process.
It assumes that both of those processes will remain the same.

## How to teach this

The contents of this HIP will be discussed in the public Helm Dev meeting, which is recorded.
If possible, the kick-off meeting will be held at KubeCon North America in 2024,

> and the resources of CNCF will be utilized for advertising this meeting and its purposes.

Reviewer 2: In the past, we have had specific meeting space at kubecons outside of session. This time we are doing booth time, contribfest time, and a session. We don't have the space reserved or, I think, have the bandwidth for a separate kickoff meeting. How would you see this unfolding?

Author: This is the old verbiage. I corrected the date, without thinking too much about the rest. I'll update the rest shortly

## References

- The Helm org's [governance documents](https://github.com/helm/community/tree/master/governance)
- The [Helm 3 planning documents](https://github.com/helm/community/tree/master/hips/archives/helm/helm-v3)

## Appendix

### Helm 4 proposal template

```
TBD

> ```

Reviewer 2: How should this be different from a HIP?

Author: (will discuss in slack)
